\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@setfilename ledger.info
@settitle Ledger: Command-Line Accounting

@dircategory User Applications
@copying
Copyright (c) 2003-2007, John Wiegley.  All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

- Neither the name of New Artisans LLC nor the names of its
  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
  this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
@end copying

@documentencoding iso-8859-1

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@titlepage
@title Ledger: Command-Line Accounting
@author John Wiegley
@end titlepage

@direntry
* Ledger: (ledger).           Command Line Accounting
@end direntry

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Overview

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@chapter Anatomy of a journal file

Everything begins with a journal file---the anatomy of which is covered
in detail in chapter one.  To review: a @emph{journal} contains one or
more @emph{entries}, each of which refers to two or more
@emph{transactions}.  A @emph{transaction} specifies that a given
@emph{amount} is added to, or subtracted from, an @emph{account}.
(@emph{Accounts} may be nested hierarchically by separating the elements
using a colon).  Lastly, an @emph{amount} is a figure representing a
given @emph{quantity} of a @emph{commodity}.  Here follows a review of
these terms, which are all used extensively throughout this chapter:

@table @emph
@item journal
A journal is a data file containing a series of entries.

@item entry
An entry relates a group of two or more transactions, with the absolute
constraint that the total sum of an entry's transactions must equal
zero.  That is, every entry in a journal must @emph{balance} to zero.

@item transaction
Transactions record how commodities are moved between accounts.  If you
spent money on a movie ticket, for example, such an entry would have two
transactions: One to show how the money was taken from your wallet, and
another to show how it was applied to your movie expenses.

@item account
An account 

@item amount

@item quantity

@item commodity
@end table

@chapter Example accounting practices

@chapter Generating useful reports

Once you have a journal file representing a recent history of your
finances, the next step is to generate reports in order to give richer
meaning to this data.  For example: Where do you spend your money?  Do
you have enough to cover upcoming expenses?  Are you creating or losing
net worth?  Are your investment performing well?  All of these questions
can be answered easily with Ledger---if you know how to ask them.

Preparing complex reports is not a simple task, but neither is it a
difficult one.  All that's required is a proper understanding of how
Ledger views your data, and how it prepares it for reporting.

After Ledger reads a journal file, it creates an in-memory
representation reflecting the order and composition of those entries.

@chapter Mastering value expressions

@chapter Mastering format strings

@chapter Building extensions with Python

@chapter Ledger's Architecture

@section Core Numerics

amount_t
commodity_t
updater_t
datetime_t
balance_t
balance_pair_t
value_t
valexpr_t
format_t
mask_t

@section Journal Representation

journal_t
account_t
entry_t
transaction_t
parser_t

@section Reporting

@section Terminal Interface

@section General Utility

@bye
