{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl264\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 These are the most basic command options.  Most likely, the user will\
want to set them using environment variables (see @ref\{Options\}),\
instead of using actual command-line options:\
\
@option\{--help\} (@option\{-h\}) prints a summary of all the options, and\
what they are used for.  This can be a handy way to remember which\
options do what.  This help screen is also printed if ledger is run\
without a command.\
\
@option\{--version\} (@option\{-v\}) prints the current version of ledger\
and exits.  This is useful for sending bug reports, to let the author\
know which version of ledger you are using.\
\
@option\{--file FILE\} (@option\{-f FILE\}) reads FILE as a ledger file.\
This command may be used multiple times.  FILE may also be a list of\
file names separated by colons.  Typically, the environment variable\
@env\{LEDGER_FILE\} is set, rather than using this command-line option.\
\
@option\{--output FILE\} (@option\{-o FILE\}) redirects output from any\
command to @var\{FILE\}.  By default, all output goes to standard\
output.\
\
@option\{--init-file FILE\} (@option\{-i FILE\}) causes FILE to be read by\
ledger before any other ledger file.  This file may not contain any\
postings, but it may contain option settings.  To specify options\
in the init file, use the same syntax as the command-line.  Here's an\
example init file:\
\
@smallexample\
--price-db ~/finance/.pricedb\
\
; ~/.ledgerrc ends here\
@end smallexample\
\
Option settings on the command-line or in the environment always take\
precedence over settings in the init file.\
\
@option\{--cache FILE\} identifies FILE as the default binary cache\
file.  That is, if the ledger files to be read are specified using the\
environment variable @env\{LEDGER_FILE\}, then whenever a command is\
finished a binary copy will be written to the specified cache, to\
speed up the loading time of subsequent queries.  This filename can\
also be given using the environment variable @env\{LEDGER_CACHE\}, or by\
putting the option into your init file.  The @option\{--no-cache\}\
option causes Ledger to always ignore the binary cache.\
\
@option\{--account NAME\} (@option\{-a NAME\}) specifies the default\
account which QIF file postings are assumed to relate to.}