{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl264\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 The ledger file format is quite simple, but also very flexible.  It\
supports many options, though typically the user can ignore most of\
them.  They are summarized below.\
\
The initial character of each line determines what the line means, and\
how it should be interpreted.  Allowable initial characters are:\
\
@table @code\
@item NUMBER\
A line beginning with a number denotes a transaction.  It may be followed\
by any number of lines, each beginning with whitespace, to denote the\
transaction's account postings.  The format of the first line is:\
\
@example\
DATE[=EDATE] [*|!] [(CODE)] DESC\
@end example\
\
If @samp\{*\} appears after the date (with optional effective date), it\
indicates the transaction is ``cleared'', which can mean whatever the user\
wants it t omean.  If @samp\{!\} appears after the date, it indicates d\
the transaction is ``pending''; i.e., tentatively cleared from the user's\
point of view, but not yet actually cleared.  If a @samp\{CODE\} appears\
in parentheses, it may be used to indicate a check number, or the type\
of the posting.  Following these is the payee, or a description of\
the posting.\
\
The format of each following posting is:\
\
@example\
  ACCOUNT  AMOUNT  [; NOTE]\
@end example\
\
The @samp\{ACCOUNT\} may be surrounded by parentheses if it is a virtual\
postings, or square brackets if it is a virtual postings that\
must balance.  The @samp\{AMOUNT\} can be followed by a per-unit\
posting cost, by specifying @samp\{@@ AMOUNT\}, or a complete\
posting cost with @samp\{@@@@ AMOUNT\}.  Lastly, the @samp\{NOTE\} may\
specify an actual and/or effective date for the posting by using\
the syntax @samp\{[ACTUAL_DATE]\} or @samp\{[=EFFECTIVE_DATE]\} or\
@samp\{[ACTUAL_DATE=EFFECtIVE_DATE]\}.\
\
@item =\
An automated transaction.  A value expression must appear after the equal\
sign.\
\
After this initial line there should be a set of one or more\
postings, just as if it were normal transaction.  If the amounts of the\
postings have no commodity, they will be applied as modifiers to\
whichever real posting is matched by the value expression.\
\
@item ~\
A period transaction.  A period expression must appear after the tilde.\
\
After this initial line there should be a set of one or more\
postings, just as if it were normal transaction.\
\
@item !\
A line beginning with an exclamation mark denotes a command directive.\
It must be immediately followed by the command word.  The supported\
commands are:\
\
@table @samp\
@item !include\
Include the stated ledger file.\
\
@item !account\
The account name is given is taken to be the parent of all\
postings that follow, until @samp\{!end\} is seen.\
\
@item !end\
Ends an account block.\
@end table\
\
@item ;\
A line beginning with a colon indicates a comment, and is ignored.\
\
@item Y\
If a line begins with a capital Y, it denotes the year used for all\
subsequent transactions that give a date without a year.  The year should\
appear immediately after the Y, for example: @samp\{Y2004\}.  This is\
useful at the beginning of a file, to specify the year for that file.\
If all transactions specify a year, however, this command has no effect.\
\
@item P\
Specifies a historical price for a commodity.  These are usually found\
in a pricing history file (see the @option\{-Q\} option).  The syntax\
is:\
@example\
P DATE SYMBOL PRICE\
@end example\
\
@item N SYMBOL\
Indicates that pricing information is to be ignored for a given\
symbol, nor will quotes ever be downloaded for that symbol.  Useful\
with a home currency, such as the dollar ($).  It is recommended that\
these pricing options be set in the price database file, which\
defaults to @file\{~/.pricedb\}.  The syntax for this command is:\
@example\
N SYMBOL\
@end example\
\
@item D AMOUNT\
Specifies the default commodity to use, by specifying an amount in the\
expected format.  The @command\{transaction\} command will use this commodity\
as the default when none other can be determined.  This command may be\
used multiple times, to set the default flags for different\
commodities; whichever is seen last is used as the default commodity.\
For example, to set US dollars as the default commodity, while also\
setting the thousands flag and decimal flag for that commodity, use:\
@example\
D $1,000.00\
@end example\
\
@item C AMOUNT1 = AMOUNT2\
Specifies a commodity conversion, where the first amount is given to\
be equivalent to the second amount.  The first amount should use the\
decimal precision desired during reporting:\
@example\
C 1.00 Kb = 1024 bytes\
@end example\
\
@item i, o, b, h\
These four relate to timeclock support, which permits ledger to read\
timelog files.  See the timeclock's documentation for more info on the\
syntax of its timelog files.\
@end table}