{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl264\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Format strings may be used to change the output format of reports.\
They are specified by passing a formatting string to the\
@option\{--format\} (@option\{-F\}) option.  Within that string,\
constructs are allowed which make it possible to display the various\
parts of an account or posting in custom ways.\
\
Within a format strings, a substitution is specified using a percent\
character (@samp\{%\}).  The basic format of all substitutions is:\
\
@example\
%[-][MIN WIDTH][.MAX WIDTH]EXPR\
@end example\
\
If the optional minus sign (@samp\{-\}) follows the percent character,\
whatever is substituted will be left justified.  The default is right\
justified.  If a minimum width is given next, the substituted text\
will be at least that wide, perhaps wider.  If a period and a maximum\
width is given, the substituted text will never be wider than this,\
and will be truncated to fit.  Here are some examples:\
\
@example\
%-P     a transaction's payee, left justified\
%20P    The same, right justified, at least 20 chars wide\
%.20P   The same, no more than 20 chars wide\
%-.20P  Left justified, maximum twenty chars wide\
@end example\
\
The expression following the format constraints can be a single\
letter, or an expression enclosed in parentheses or brackets.  The\
allowable expressions are:\
\
@table @code\
@item %\
Inserts a percent sign.\
\
@item t\
Inserts the results of the value expression specified by @option\{-t\}.\
If @option\{-t\} was not specified, the current report style's value\
expression is used.\
\
@item T\
Inserts the results of the value expression specified by @option\{-T\}.\
If @option\{-T\} was not specified, the current report style's value\
expression is used.\
\
@item |\
Inserts a single space.  This is useful if a width is specified, for\
inserting a certain number of spaces.\
\
@item _\
Inserts a space for each level of an account's depth.  That is, if an\
account has two parents, this construct will insert two spaces.  If a\
minimum width is specified, that much space is inserted for each level\
of depth.  Thus @samp\{%5_\}, for an account with four parents, will\
insert twenty spaces.\
\
@item (EXPR)\
Inserts the amount resulting from the value expression given in\
parentheses.  To insert five times the total value of an account, for\
example, one could say @samp\{%12(5*O)\}.  Note: It's important to put\
the five first in that expression, so that the commodity doesn't get\
stripped from the total.\
\
@item [DATEFMT]\
Inserts the result of formatting a posting's date with a date\
format string, epostly like those supported by @code\{strftime\}.  For\
example: @samp\{%[%Y/%m/%d %H:%M:%S]\}.\
\
@item S\
Insert the pathname of the file from which the transaction's data was read.\
\
@item B\
Inserts the beginning character position of that transaction within the file.\
\
@item b\
Inserts the beginning line of that transaction within the file.\
\
@item E\
Inserts the ending character position of that transaction within the file.\
\
@item e\
Inserts the ending line of that transaction within the file.\
\
@item D\
By default, this is the same as @samp\{%[%Y/%m%/d]\}.  The date format\
used can be changed at any time with the @option\{-y\} flag, however.\
Using @samp\{%D\} gives the user more control over the way dates are\
output.\
\
@item d\
This is the same as the @samp\{%D\} option, unless the transaction has an\
effective date, in which case it prints\
@samp\{[ACTUAL_DATE=EFFECtIVE_DATE]\}.\
\
@item X\
If a posting has been cleared, this inserts @samp\{*\} followed by a\
space; otherwise nothing is inserted.\
\
@item Y\
This is the same as @samp\{%X\}, except that it only displays a state\
character if all of the member postings have the same state.\
\
@item C\
Inserts the checking number for a transaction, in parentheses, followed by\
a space; if none was specified, nothing is inserted.\
\
@item P\
Inserts the payee related to a posting.\
\
@item a\
Inserts the optimal short name for an account.  This is normally used\
in balance reports.  It prints a parent account's name if that name\
has not been printed yet, otherwise it just prints the account's name.\
\
@item A\
Inserts the full name of an account.\
\
@item W\
This is the same as @samp\{%A\}, except that it first displays the\
posting's state @emph\{if the transaction's posting states are not\
all the same\}, followed by the full account name.  This is offered as\
a printing optimization, so that combined with @samp\{%Y\}, only the\
minimum amount of state detail is printed.\
\
@item o\
Inserts the ``optimized'' form of a posting's amount.  This is\
used by the print report.  In some cases, this inserts nothing; in\
others, it inserts the posting amount and its cost.  It's use is\
not recommend unless you are modifying the print report.\
\
@item n\
Inserts the note associated with a posting, preceded by two spaces\
and a semi-colon, if it exists.  Thus, no none becomes an empty\
string, while the note @samp\{foo\} is substituted as @samp\{ ; foo\}.\
\
@item N\
Inserts the note associated with a posting, if one exists.\
\
@item /\
The @samp\{%/\} construct is special.  It separates a format string\
between what is printed for the first posting of a transaction, and\
what is printed for all subsequent postings.  If not used, the\
same format string is used for all postings.\
@end table}