\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@setfilename ledger.info
@settitle Ledger: Command-Line Accounting

@dircategory User Applications
@copying
Copyright (c) 2003-2010, John Wiegley.  All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

- Neither the name of New Artisans LLC nor the names of its
  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
  this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
@end copying

@documentencoding UTF-8

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@macro ledgerprog
  @sc{ledger}
@end macro


@titlepage
@title LEDGER: Command-Line Accounting
@author John Wiegley
@end titlepage

@direntry
* Ledger: (ledger).           Command-Line Accounting
@end direntry

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top,  , (dir), (dir)
@top Overview

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@ifnottex
@section Copyright
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu 
* Introduction to Ledger::
* Principles of Accounting::
* Keeping a Journal::
* Command-line Syntax::
* Basic Reporting Commands::
* Value Expressions::
* Format Strings::
* Journal File Format::
* Extending with Python::
@end menu


@c each chapter is in an idividual texi file included here
@include L3-Introduction.texi
@include L3-Principles.texi
@include L3-Journal.texi
@include L3-Syntax.texi
@include L3-Reporting.texi
@include L3-ValueExpressions.texi
@include L3-FormatStrings.texi
@include L3-JournalFormat.texi
@include L3-Python.texi

@bye
