{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl264\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Ledger makes no assumptions about the commodities you use; it only\
requires that you specify a commodity.  The commodity may be any\
non-numeric string that does not contain a period, comma, forward\
slash or at-sign.  It may appear before or after the amount, although\
it is assumed that symbols appearing before the amount refer to\
currencies, while non-joined symbols appearing after the amount refer\
to commodities.  Here are some valid currency and commodity\
specifiers:\
\
@example\
$20.00         ; currency: twenty US dollars\
40 AAPL        ; commodity: 40 shares of Apple stock\
60 DM          ; currency: 60 Deutsch Mark\
\'a350            ; currency: 50 British pounds\
50 EUR         ; currency: 50 Euros (or use appropriate symbol)\
@end example\
\
Ledger will examine the first use of any commodity to determine how\
that commodity should be printed on reports.  It pays attention to\
whether the name of commodity was separated from the amount, whether\
it came before or after, the precision used in specifying the amount,\
whether thousand marks were used, etc.  This is done so that printing\
the commodity looks the same as the way you use it.\
\
An account may contain multiple commodities, in which case it will\
have separate totals for each.  For example, if your brokerage account\
contains both cash, gold, and several stock quantities, the balance\
might look like:\
\
@smallexample\
  $200.00\
100.00 AU\
  AAPL 40\
 BORL 100\
 FEQTX 50  Assets:Brokerage\
@end smallexample\
\
This balance report shows how much of each commodity is in your\
brokerage account.\
\
Sometimes, you will want to know the current street value of your\
balance, and not the commodity totals.  For this to happen, you must\
specify what the current price is for each commodity.  The price can\
be any commodity, in which case the balance will be computed in terms\
of that commodity.  The usual way to specify prices is with a price\
history file, which might look like this:\
\
@smallexample\
P 2004/06/21 02:18:01 FEQTX $22.49\
P 2004/06/21 02:18:01 BORL $6.20\
P 2004/06/21 02:18:02 AAPL $32.91\
P 2004/06/21 02:18:02 AU $400.00\
@end smallexample\
\
Specify the price history to use with the @option\{--price-db\} option,\
with the @option\{-V\} option to report in terms of current market\
value:\
\
@example\
ledger --price-db prices.db -V balance brokerage\
@end example\
\
The balance for your brokerage account will be reported in US dollars,\
since the prices database uses that currency.\
\
@smallexample\
$40880.00  Assets:Brokerage\
@end smallexample\
\
You can convert from any commodity to any other commodity.  Let's say\
you had $5000 in your checking account, and for whatever reason you\
wanted to know many ounces of gold that would buy, in terms of the\
current price of gold:\
\
@example\
ledger -T "@\{1 AU@\}*(O/P@\{1 AU@\})" balance checking\
@end example\
\
Although the total expression appears complex, it is simply saying\
that the reported total should be in multiples of AU units, where the\
quantity is the account total divided by the price of one AU.  Without\
the initial multiplication, the reported total would still use the\
dollars commodity, since multiplying or dividing amounts always keeps\
the left value's commodity.  The result of this command might be:\
\
@smallexample\
14.01 AU  Assets:Checking\
@end smallexample}