{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl264\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 There are situations when the accounts you're tracking are different\
between your clients and the financial institutions where money is\
kept.  An example of this is working as the treasurer for a religious\
institution.  From the secular point of view, you might be working\
with three different accounts:\
\
@itemize\
@item Checking\
@item Savings\
@item Credit Card\
@end itemize\
\
From a religious point of view, the community expects to divide its\
resources into multiple ``funds'', from which it makes purchases or\
reserves resources for later:\
\
@itemize\
@item School fund\
@item Building fund\
@item Community fund\
@end itemize\
\
The problem with this kind of setup is that when you spend money, it\
comes from two or more places at once: the account and the fund.  And\
yet, the correlation of amounts between funds and accounts is rarely\
one-to-one.  What if the school fund has @samp\{$500.00\}, but\
@samp\{$400.00\} of that comes from Checking, and @samp\{$100.00\} from\
Savings?\
\
Traditional finance packages require that the money reside in only one\
place.  But there are really two ``views'' of the data: from the\
account point of view and from the fund point of view -- yet both sets\
should reflect the same overall expenses and cash flow.  It's simply\
where the money resides that differs.\
\
This situation can be handled one of two ways.  The first is using\
virtual postings to represent the fact that money is moving to and\
from two kind of accounts at the same time:\
\
@smallexample\
2004/03/20 Contributions\
    Assets:Checking                    $500.00\
    Income:Donations\
\
2004/03/25 Distribution of donations\
    [Funds:School]                     $300.00\
    [Funds:Building]                   $200.00\
    [Assets:Checking]                 $-500.00\
@end smallexample\
\
The use of square brackets in the second transaction ensures that the\
virtual postings balance to zero.  Now money can be spent directly\
from a fund at the same time as money is drawn from a physical\
account:\
\
@smallexample\
2004/03/25 Payment for books (paid from Checking)\
    Expenses:Books                    $100.00\
    Assets:Checking                  $-100.00\
    (Funds:School)                   $-100.00\
@end smallexample\
\
When reports are generated, by default they'll appear in terms of the\
funds.  In this case, you will likely want to mask out your\
@samp\{Assets\} account, because otherwise the balance won't make much\
sense:\
\
@example\
ledger bal -^Assets\
@end example\
\
If the @option\{--real\} option is used, the report will be in terms of\
the real accounts:\
\
@example\
ledger --real bal\
@end example\
\
If more asset accounts are needed as the source of a posting, just\
list them as you would normally, for example:\
\
@smallexample\
2004/03/25 Payment for books (paid from Checking)\
    Expenses:Books                    $100.00\
    Assets:Checking                   $-50.00\
    Liabilities:Credit Card           $-50.00\
    (Funds:School)                   $-100.00\
@end smallexample\
\
The second way of tracking funds is to use transaction codes.  In this\
respect the codes become like virtual accounts that embrace the entire\
set of postings.  Basically, we are associating a transaction with a\
fund by setting its code.  Here are two transactions that desposit money\
into, and spend money from, the @samp\{Funds:School\} fund:\
\
@smallexample\
2004/03/25 (Funds:School) Donations\
    Assets:Checking                   $100.00\
    Income:Donations\
\
2004/04/25 (Funds:School) Payment for books\
    Expenses:Books                     $50.00\
    Assets:Checking\
@end smallexample\
\
Note how the accounts now relate only to the real accounts, and any\
balance or registers reports will reflect this.  That the transactions\
relate to a particular fund is kept only in the code.\
\
How does this become a fund report?  By using the\
@option\{--code-as-payee\} option, you can generate a register report\
where the payee for each posting shows the code.  Alone, this is\
not terribly interesting; but when combined with the\
@option\{--by-payee\} option, you will now see account subtotals for any\
postings related to a specific fund.  So, to see the current\
monetary balances of all funds, the command would be:\
\
@smallexample\
ledger --code-as-payee -P reg ^Assets\
@end smallexample\
\
Or to see a particular funds expenses, the @samp\{School\} fund in this\
case:\
\
@smallexample\
ledger --code-as-payee -P reg ^Expenses -- School\
@end smallexample\
\
Both approaches yield different kinds of flexibility, depending on how\
you prefer to think of your funds: as virtual accounts, or as tags\
associated with particular transactions.  Your own tastes will decide which\
is best for your situation.}