{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl264\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 These options affect only the output, but not which postings are\
used to create it:\
\
@option\{--collapse\} (@option\{-n\}) causes transactions in a\
@command\{register\} report with multiple postings to be collapsed\
into a single, subtotaled transaction.\
\
@option\{--subtotal\} (@option\{-s\}) causes all transactions in a\
@command\{register\} report to be collapsed into a single, subtotaled\
transaction.\
\
@option\{--by-payee\} (@option\{-P\}) reports subtotals by payee.\
\
@option\{--comm-as-payee\} (@option\{-x\}) changes the payee of every\
posting to be the commodity used in that posting.  This can be\
useful when combined with other options, such as @option\{-s\}.\
\
@option\{--empty\} (@option\{-E\}) includes even empty accounts in the\
@command\{balance\} report.\
\
@option\{--weekly\} (@option\{-W\}) reports posting totals by the\
week.  The week begins on whichever day of the week begins the month\
containing that posting.  To set a specific begin date, use a\
period string, such as @samp\{weekly from DATE\}.  @option\{--monthly\}\
(@option\{-M\}) reports posting totals by month; @option\{--yearly\}\
(@option\{-Y\}) reports posting totals by year.  For more complex\
period, using the @option\{--period\} option described above.\
\
@option\{--dow\} reports postings totals for each day of the week.\
This is an easy way to see if weekend spending is more than on\
weekdays.\
\
@option\{--sort EXPR\} (@option\{-S EXPR\}) sorts a report by comparing\
the values determined using the value expression @var\{EXPR\}.  For\
example, using @option\{-S -UT\} in the balance report will sort account\
balances from greatest to least, using the absolute value of the\
total.  For more on how to use value expressions, see @ref\{Value\
expressions\}.\
\
@option\{--wide\} (@option\{-w\}) causes the default @command\{register\}\
report to assume 132 columns instead of 80.\
\
@option\{--head\} causes only the first N transactions to be printed.  This\
is different from using the command-line utility @command\{head\}, which\
would limit to the first N postings.  @option\{--tail\} outputs only\
the last N transactions.  Both options may be used simultaneously.  If a\
negative amount is given, it will invert the meaning of the flag\
(instead of the first five transactions being printed, for example, it\
would print all but the first five).\
\
@option\{--pager\} tells Ledger to pass its output to the given pager\
program---very useful when the output is especially long.  This\
behavior can be made the default by setting the @env\{LEDGER_PAGER\}\
environment variable.\
\
@option\{--average\} (@option\{-A\}) reports the average posting\
value.\
\
@option\{--deviation\} (@option\{-D\}) reports each posting's\
deviation from the average.  It is only meaningful in the\
@command\{register\} and @command\{prices\} reports.\
\
@option\{--percentage\} (@option\{-%\}) shows account subtotals in the\
@command\{balance\} report as percentages of the parent account.\
\
@option\{--totals\} include running total information in the\
@command\{xml\} report.\
\
@option\{--amount-data\} (@option\{-j\}) changes the @command\{register\}\
report so that it output nothing but the date and the value column,\
and the latter without commodities.  This is only meaningful if the\
report uses a single commodity.  This data can then be fed to other\
programs, which could plot the date, analyze it, etc.\
\
@option\{--total-data\} (@option\{-J\}) changes the @command\{register\}\
report so that it output nothing but the date and totals column,\
without commodities.\
\
@option\{--display EXPR\} (@option\{-d EXPR\}) limits which postings\
or accounts or actually displayed in a report.  They might still be\
calculated, and be part of the running total of a register report, for\
example, but they will not be displayed.  This is useful for seeing\
last month's checking postings, against a running balance which\
includes all posting values:\
\
@example\
ledger -d "d>=[last month]" reg checking\
@end example\
\
The output from this command is very different from the following,\
whose running total includes only postings from the last month\
onward:\
\
@example\
ledger -p "last month" reg checking\
@end example\
\
Which is more useful depends on what you're looking to know: the total\
amount for the reporting range (@option\{-p\}), or simply a display\
restricted to the reporting range (using @option\{-d\}).\
\
@option\{--date-format STR\} (@option\{-y STR\}) changes the basic date\
format used by reports.  The default uses a date like 2004/08/01,\
which represents the default date format of @samp\{%Y/%m/%d\}.  To\
change the way dates are printed in general, the easiest way is to put\
@option\{--date-format FORMAT\} in the Ledger initialization file\
@file\{~/.ledgerrc\} (or the file referred to by @env\{LEDGER_INIT\}).\
\
@option\{--format STR\} (@option\{-F STR\}) sets the reporting format for\
whatever report ledger is about to make.  @xref\{Format strings\}.\
There are also specific format commands for each report type:\
\
@itemize\
@item @option\{--balance-format STR\}\
@item @option\{--register-format STR\}\
@item @option\{--print-format STR\}\
@item @option\{--plot-amount-format STR\} (-j @command\{register\})\
@item @option\{--plot-total-format STR\} (-J @command\{register\})\
@item @option\{--equity-format STR\}\
@item @option\{--prices-format STR\}\
@item @option\{--wide-register-format STR\} (-w @command\{register\})\
@end itemize}