{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl264\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 These options affect how commodity values are displayed:\
\
@option\{--price-db FILE\} sets the file that is used for recording\
downloaded commodity prices.  It is always read on startup, to\
determine historical prices.  Other settings can be placed in this\
file manually, to prevent downloading quotes for a specific, for\
example.  This is done by adding a line like the following:\
\
@example\
; Don't download quotes for the dollar, or timelog values\
N $\
N h\
@end example\
\
@option\{--price-exp MINS\} (@option\{-L MINS\}) sets the expected\
freshness of price quotes, in minutes.  That is, if the last known\
quote for any commodity is older than this value---and if\
@option\{--download\} is being used---then the Internet will be\
consulted again for a newer price.  Otherwise, the old price is still\
considered to be fresh enough.\
\
@option\{--download\} (@option\{-Q\}) causes quotes to be automagically\
downloaded, as needed, by running a script named @command\{getquote\}\
and expecting that script to return a value understood by ledger.  A\
sample implementation of a @command\{getquote\} script, implemented in\
Perl, is provided in the distribution.  Downloaded quote price are\
then appended to the price database, usually specified using the\
environment variable @env\{LEDGER_PRICE_DB\}.\
\
There are several different ways that ledger can report the totals it\
displays.  The most flexible way to adjust them is by using value\
expressions, and the @option\{-t\} and @option\{-T\} options.  However,\
there are also several ``default'' reports, which will satisfy most\
users basic reporting needs:\
\
@table @code\
@item -O, --quantity\
Reports commodity totals (this is the default)\
\
@item -B, --basis\
Reports the cost basis for all postings.\
\
@item -V, --market\
Reports the last known market value for all commodities.\
\
@item -G --gain\
Reports the net gain/loss for all commodities in the report that have\
a price history.\
@end table}